
Version 1.18.0   
==============

Documentation Updates
---------------------

- Updated development guidelines with new procedures related to using forks.
  Apart from a small number of maintainers, code contributions are now expected
  to come from forks.  Also, all the developer-specific installation details
  have been removed from the main installation doc.
- Cleaned up documentation referring to the telluric atmospheric grids. Much of
  the old documentation had not been updated to reflect the PCA models, leading
  to some confusion.


Dependency Changes
------------------

- Bump dependency to specutils>=2.0


Functionality/Performance Improvements and Additions
----------------------------------------------------

- The WCS for datacubes now adopts the convention of North
  is up and East is left. In previous version of PypeIt,
  East was right.
- Improved the code to compute the spatial flexure correction and added a QA
  plot to inspect the results.  Two new parset parameters, ``spat_flexure_sigdetect``
  and ``spat_flexure_vrange``, were added to control the detection of the slit edges
  (used to compute the flexure) and the stretching of the image in the QA plot,
  respectively.
- Setup GUI allows resizing panels when viewing pypeit files.
- Setup GUI allows selecting which detector to view when viewing raw data.
- Added backwards compatibilty for old frames taken with the Bok B&C
- The object trace can now be iterated over with the ``find_numiterfit``
  parameter.
- Added ``EdgeTracePar`` parameter ``mask_off_detector`` to allow the user to mask spectral
  regions in each slit/order where more than 50% of the slit falls off the detector
- Adds Subaru/FOCAS to the instrument suite
- Added ``SensfuncPar`` parameter ``trim_std_pixs`` to allow the user to "trim" the
  standard star 1D spectrum by a user-defined number of pixels before computing the
  sensitivity function.
- We include new, brighter blackbody standard stars, as reported in Cooke,
  Suzuki and Prochaska (2025).
- We have removed J1255p1924 as a blackbody flux calibration standard star. Based on X-SHOOTER
  observations by Cooke, Suzuki and Prochaska (2025), this white dwarf star has Ca II absorption.
- Allow the user to skip writing 2D science spectrum files.  Note that this should
  only be invoked after careful inspection of a sample of 2D reduced spectra and
  when the user is completely satisfied of the quality of the extracted 1D spectra.
- Added ``ExtractionPar`` parameter ``min_frac_prof`` to allow the user to set the minimum
  fraction of the object spatial profile that is not masked in the optimal extraction.
- Changed the implementation on how to set the reference objects, used to
  compute spatial offsets and/or weights when combining 2D spectra (i.e.,
  ``pypeit_coadd_2dspec``). The user can now provide a list of reference objects
  (one per spec2d file) using the ``SPAT_PIXPOS_ID`` or ``ECH_FRACPOS_ID`` (for
  MultiSlit and Echelle data, respectively) attributes in ``SpecObj`` as unique
  identifiers for reference objects. These identifiers can be provided using the
  ``user_obj_ids`` parameter in the ``Coadd2DPar`` parsets. The ``user_obj``
  parameter has been removed.
- Restricted the range of stretch corrections to the wavelength solution in telluric
  fits to a more reasonable one to avoid catastrophic edge cases.
- Passed the `TelluricPar` parameter `resln_frac_bounds` through to the tellfit script
  functions (qso_telluric, star_telluric, poly_telluric)


Instrument-specific Updates
---------------------------

- Added wavelength template for Gemini GMOS-N/GMOS-S R150 grating.
- Added support for the Levy spectrograph on the Automated Planet Finder at Lick
  Observatory (APF/Levy)


Script Changes
--------------

- ``pypeit_setup_gui`` script has been removed. The Setup GUI can be started
  with ``pypeit_setup -G``.
- Added ``pypeit_run_to_calibstep`` to run PypeIt to an input calibration
  step. This script is useful to re-generate calibration files for a given
  configuration without running the full reduction.
- Added finer debugging control for ``pypeit_trace_edges``
- Added ``"-p", "--param_block_file"`` option to ``pypeit_setup`` that allows
  the user to specify the name of a file containing pre-formatted user
  parameters to be added to the Parameter Block of the ``.pypeit`` file.  This
  option is useful when project-specific parameters need to be repeatedly
  specified across many ``.pypeit`` files.


Datamodel Changes
-----------------

- The ``SpecObj`` datamodel has been updated (v1.1.12) to include the ``BOX_R_ASEC``
  attribute, which contains the information about the size of the boxcar radius in
  arcsec. In addition, the already existing ``BOX_RADIUS`` attribute, which contains
  the boxcar radius in pixels, had the name changed to ``BOX_R_PIX``.
- The ``SpecObj`` datamodel has been updated (v1.1.13) to include the ``SPAT_PIXPOS_ID``
  and ``ECH_FRACPOS_ID`` attributes, which are unique identifiers for the extracted objects
  from MultiSlit and Echelle data, respectively.


Under-the-hood Improvements
---------------------------

- Updates the ``pypeit_trace_edges`` script to use ``lampoffflats``, if they're
  provided by the pypeit file passed to the script.
- Moved ``deprecated``, ``paper``, ``presentations``, and ``proposals``
  directories into a new repository ``PypeIt-misc``.
- Abstracted generation of GitHub remote paths in the cache system to make sure
  functionality works when working in a fork of the code.
- Basic maintenance on :class:`~pypeit.bspline.bspline.bspline`: Removed
  ``*kwargs`` from instantiation call, removed redundant (``placed`` vs.
  ``bkpts``) arguments, removed unused to/from dict functionality, cleaned up
  construction of breakpoints, added docs.


Bug Fixes
---------

- Fix the WCS for the datacube generation. There was an offset
  in both spatial dimensions equal to half the field of view.
- Fix the code for the extraction of the 1D flat spectrum, so that
  the spectrum is extracted even when ``pixelflat_model`` does not exist.
- The variance cube previously had a cubic term, and this has been changed
  to a quadratic term. This has been cross-checked with simple subpixel calculations.
- Fixes bug associated with trying to remove or add slits for reductions that
  mosaic multiple detectors.
- Fix Setup GUI sizing issues on MacOS.
- Fixed a bug with ``pypeit_identify`` when the number of echelle orders has
  more than two digits.
- Fixed bug when defining manual extraction apertures for 2D coadds of echelle
  data
- Fix a bug in the fluxed std star QA plot generated by ``pypeit_sensfunc``, where
  the plot was showing an inconsistency between the observed and the true fluxes.
- For Gemini GMOS, PypeIt now correctly uses mask definition files with tilted
  slits. (Before, it would simply fail with an error message if any slits were
  tilted.)
- Fix a bug in the ``order_platescale()`` method for the ``keck_esi`` spectrograph,
  where the wrong binning was used to compute the platescale.
- Fix a bug in how the ``box_width``, showed in arcsec in the "spec1d*.txt" file, was
  computed for the echelle data. The value was previously not accounting for the
  order-specific plate scale.
- Fix a bug in the ``core.findobj_skymask.ech_fill_in_orders()`` method, where attributes
  of objects only found on some orders were not properly propagated to the other orders.
- Fixed a bug causing 2D coadding of SOAR/Goodman data to fault based on the
  extensions of the spec2d files.
