
Version 2.1.0dev
================

Breaking Changes
---------------------

Documentation Updates
---------------------

- Updated the documentation about the use of the mask design file for Gemini/GMOS.
  See the :ref:`gemini_gmos` documentation for details.
- Updated the Setup GUI tutorial to reflect the new look of the GUI.
- Modified the ``update_docs`` script to allow the docs to be build without
  access to ``$PYPEIT_DEV/RAW_DATA``.

Dependency Changes
------------------

- Adds support for python 3.14

Functionality/Performance Improvements and Additions
----------------------------------------------------

- Setup GUI now uses a standard button bar that can be moved. 
- Re-enabled the Cancel button on the Setup GUI progress dialog.
- Increased default font size for Setup GUI.

Instrument-specific Updates
---------------------------

- Rewrote MMT Binospec overscan subtraction in ``binospec_read_amp()`` to match
  the IDL pipeline (``bino_mosaic.pro``): Y-axis postscan first, then X-axis
  prescan+postscan, using sigma-clipped mean with outlier cleaning.  Added
  per-amplifier nonlinearity correction using degree-4 polynomial coefficients
  from the IDL calibration file.
- Updated the MMT Binospec bad pixel mask to match the IDL pipeline, adding
  ~12,500 individual bad pixels, additional bad columns, and detector trap
  region masking from static calibration files.
- MMT/Binospec: extended the ``mmt_binospec_1000`` reid_arxiv template redward
  from 6760 Å to 7211 Å to support central wavelengths around 6450 Å.  The
  red extension was wavelength-calibrated from a calibration arc centered at
  6450 Å, anchored on HeI 5877.249, HeI 6679.995, ArI 6967.352, and HeI
  7067.138 (vacuum); cubic fit RMS = 0.04 Å.  Spliced at 6700 Å using
  :func:`~pypeit.core.wavecal.templates.build_template` with continuum
  subtraction on the new segment.
- Implemented support for VLT/UVES data reduction.

Script Changes
--------------

- Removed -G/--gui option from pypeit_obslog.

Testing
-------

- Add new tests for :mod:`~pypeit.core.pydl`
- Added new tests for :class:`~pypeit.inputfiles.InputFile` objects.

Under-the-hood Improvements
---------------------------

- Adds new :class:`~pypeit.core.fitting.PypeItFitCollection` class to replace
  the pypeit-specific uses of :class:`~pypeit.core.pydl.TraceSet`.  This was
  primarily done to avoid a circular import.
- Separated previous functions in :mod:`~pypeit.core.extract` that have to do
  with modeling the spatial profile of the object into a new module,
  :mod:`~pypeit.core.spatialprofile`.
- Restructure modules used to construct globals for an instance of PypeIt (e.g.,
  ``log`` and ``dataPaths``) into a new ``pkg`` module.  This isolates these
  operations from the rest of PypeIt.
- Refactor how script and spectrograph classes are imported.  Instead of
  importing each module in the relevant ``__init__.py`` file, we now define
  ``__all__`` and import all the relevant classes where needed.

Bug Fixes
---------

- Avoid a circular import by moving
  :func:`~pypeit.core.wavecal.autoid.arc_fit_qa` out of
  :mod:`~pypeit.core.wavecal.wv_fitting`.
- Fix an error in the platescale provided for 2D coadded data; the previous
  calculation did not account for the ``spat_samp_fact`` parameter.
- Avoid a circular import by moving
  :func:`~pypeit.loader.load_wmko_std_spectrum` to the dev-suite repo.
- Avoid a circular import by (1) removing the use of the
  :class:`~pypeit.specobj.SpecObj` object in the :mod:`~pypeit.core.extract`
  functions and (2) pulling :class:`~pypeit.multislit_flexure.MultiSlitFlexure`
  into its own file (removing it from :mod:`~pypeit.core.flexure`).
- Avoid a circular import by moving
  :func:`~pypeit.core.wavecal.waveio.load_tree` into
  :func:`~pypeit.core.wavecal.kdtree_generator`.
- Fix a bug in 2D coaddition where manually identified objects were not being
  used to compute offsets between input frames.  Add description of this failure
  mode to the :ref:`known_issues_coadd2d` documentation for 2D coaddition.
